Document loop joints / excludeFromArticulation in concepts/articulations (#2898)
newton-physics/newton: docs/concepts/articulations.rst

Only maximal-coordinate solvers (:class:`~newton.solvers.SolverXPBD`, :class:`~newton.solvers.SolverSemiImplicit`) support orphan joints.

> Generalized-coordinate solvers (:class:`~newton.solvers.SolverFeatherstone`, :class:`~newton.solvers.SolverMuJoCo`) require every joint to belong to an articulation.

Reviewer: This statement is correct for *orphan* joints (a body with no articulated path has no generalized coordinates, so Featherstone/MuJoCo can't simulate it). But once the new section refers to loop-closing joints as "orphan joints" and states MuJoCo handles them via equality constraints, this line reads as a direct contradiction. After the terminology fix above, a pointer here would help:

```suggestion
Generalized-coordinate solvers (:class:`~newton.solvers.SolverFeatherstone`, :class:`~newton.solvers.SolverMuJoCo`) require every joint to belong to an articulation.
(Loop-closing joints, whose bodies are both already in a tree, are a separate case — see :ref:`Loop closure`; :class:`~newton.solvers.SolverMuJoCo` supports these via equality constraints.)
```

.. _Loop closure:

Loop closure
------------

Newton's :meth:`~newton.ModelBuilder.add_joint_*` methods author **kinematic
trees**: each body has at most one parent joint, so the joints alone cannot
form a closed kinematic loop (for example a four-bar linkage or a parallel
mechanism). Closed loops must instead be expressed by declaring the topology
as a tree and adding a separate joint that re-couples the open end.

To close a loop, create the loop-closing joint with
:meth:`~newton.ModelBuilder.add_joint_*` but **omit it from the
``joint_list`` passed to** :meth:`~newton.ModelBuilder.add_articulation`,

> so the articulation graph remains a tree and the closing joint becomes an

Reviewer: A loop-closing joint isn't an orphan joint in Newton's validation sense — `_validate_joints` explicitly exempts joints whose child is already reachable through the tree (its docstring even names them "loop joints"). Equating the two is what leads to the `skip_validation_joints` claim below. Suggest distinguishing them:

```suggestion
so the articulation graph remains a tree. The closing joint stays outside
any articulation as a **loop-closing joint** (its two bodies are both
already in the tree, which distinguishes it from an
:ref:`orphan joint <Orphan joints>`, whose child has no articulated path):
```

Author: I'm very glad you caught that.

  # articulation below so it stays an orphan joint that closes the loop.
  j_loop = builder.add_joint_fixed(parent=child_a, child=child_b)

  # Only the tree joints (j_root, j_a, j_b) go into the articulation;
  # j_loop is excluded so the articulation graph remains a tree.
  builder.add_articulation([j_root, j_a, j_b])

  model = builder.finalize()

**Importing from USD.** The same omit-from-articulation pattern is the
standard way UsdPhysics expresses loop closures, and Newton's USD importer
honors it. Set the ``physics:excludeFromArticulation`` attribute to ``true``
on a ``PhysicsJoint`` prim, and :meth:`~newton.ModelBuilder.add_usd` will
register the joint with the builder via the normal ``add_joint_*`` path but
leave it out of the surrounding :meth:`~newton.ModelBuilder.add_articulation`
call — producing exactly the orphan-joint topology shown above. This is how
a USD asset can author a four-bar linkage or other parallel mechanism.

.. note::

   Omitting a joint from :meth:`~newton.ModelBuilder.add_articulation` is
   accepted by every Newton solver (after the default ``finalize()``
   orphan-joint check is disabled with ``skip_validation_joints=True``), but

>    each solver handles the resulting orphan joint differently:

Reviewer: This says the topology is only accepted after disabling the check with `skip_validation_joints=True`, but a genuine loop-closing joint passes `finalize()` by default — its child is already reachable (`_validate_joints`, builder.py:9244-9250). The runnable example just above calls `builder.finalize()` with no flag and works, so the note contradicts it. `skip_validation_joints=True` is only needed for *true* orphans (unreachable child). Suggest:

```suggestion
   A loop-closing joint passes :meth:`~newton.ModelBuilder.finalize`
   validation by default: unlike a true orphan joint, its child body is
   already reachable through the tree, so ``skip_validation_joints=True`` is
   not required. Each solver handles the loop-closing joint differently:
```

Follow-through: the rest of this note still says "the orphan joint" / "the resulting orphan joint" in a couple of spots — those should become "the loop-closing joint" for consistency.

Only maximal-coordinate solvers (:class:`~newton.solvers.SolverXPBD`, :class:`~newton.solvers.SolverSemiImplicit`) support orphan joints.
Generalized-coordinate solvers (:class:`~newton.solvers.SolverFeatherstone`, :class:`~newton.solvers.SolverMuJoCo`) require every joint to belong to an articulation.

.. _Loop closure:

Loop closure
------------

Newton's :meth:`~newton.ModelBuilder.add_joint_*` methods author **kinematic
trees**: each body has at most one parent joint, so the joints alone cannot
form a closed kinematic loop (for example a four-bar linkage or a parallel
mechanism). Closed loops must instead be expressed by declaring the topology
as a tree and adding a separate constraint that re-couples the open end.

There are two ways to add a loop-closing constraint. The first is to call
one of the typed equality-constraint methods —
:meth:`~newton.ModelBuilder.add_equality_constraint_connect`,
:meth:`~newton.ModelBuilder.add_equality_constraint_weld`, or
:meth:`~newton.ModelBuilder.add_equality_constraint_joint` (or the generic

> :meth:`~newton.ModelBuilder.add_equality_constraint`) — which introduces the

Reviewer: https://github.com/newton-physics/newton/pull/2961 deprecates these functions - so I don't think we should mention this in the docs.

They are a mujoco-specific extension in the future, so it's still possible, but maybe should move to the mujoco-specific docs?

Author: Will that make it in for 1.3?

Only maximal-coordinate solvers (:class:`~newton.solvers.SolverXPBD`, :class:`~newton.solvers.SolverSemiImplicit`) support orphan joints.
Generalized-coordinate solvers (:class:`~newton.solvers.SolverFeatherstone`, :class:`~newton.solvers.SolverMuJoCo`) require every joint to belong to an articulation.
(Loop-closing joints are not orphan joints and are handled separately — see :ref:`Loop closure`.)

.. _Loop closure:

Loop closure
------------

> Newton's :meth:`~newton.ModelBuilder.add_joint_*` methods author **kinematic

Reviewer: `:meth:`~newton.ModelBuilder.add_joint_*`` (here and at line 746) is used as a Sphinx cross-reference role, but `add_joint_*` is not a real method, so this is a dangling xref. It won't fail the `-W` build (`nitpicky = False`), but it renders as a non-clickable code span rather than a link. Every other wildcard method family in the docs uses a double-backtick literal — and this same section already does so for `add_joint_*()` further down (e.g. in the USD paragraph). Suggest using ``` ``add_joint_*()`` ``` here and at line 746 for consistency.
